docs/content/index.md, before:

---
title: xtraq
description: Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.
layout: landing
navigation: false
seo:
  title: Stored procedure automation for .NET
  description: Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.
---

::u-page-hero{class="py-12 sm:py-16 lg:py-20"}
#title
Stored procedure automation for .NET

#description
Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.

#links
:::u-button
---
color: primary
size: xl
to: /getting-started/installation
trailing-icon: i-lucide-arrow-right
---

Install the CLI
:::

:::u-button
---
color: neutral
icon: simple-icons-github
size: xl
to: https://github.com/nuetzliches/xtraq
variant: outline
target: \_blank
---

Star on GitHub
:::

#image
:::u-color-mode-image
---
light: /xtraq-logo.svg
dark: /xtraq-logo.svg
alt: xtraq logomark
class: w-40 mx-auto
---

:::
::

::u-container{align="center"}

## Why teams choose xtraq
Focus on SQL-first architecture while shipping .NET clients that stay in sync with every schema change.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Stored procedure first
  icon: i-heroicons-shield-check
  ---
  Respect existing database boundaries, permissions, and auditing while exposing a clean client surface.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Strongly typed artefacts
  icon: i-heroicons-cube-transparent
  ---
  Generate inputs, outputs, and helpers that match SQL signatures across .NET 8 and .NET 10.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: JSON aware by design
  icon: i-heroicons-code-bracket
  ---
  Capture nested JSON payloads, table-valued parameters, and multi-result sets without manual parsing.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Fluent pipeline design
  icon: i-heroicons-sparkles
  to: /reference/api-integration
  ---
  Compose policies, transactions, and streaming helpers without losing strongly typed procedures.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Transaction-aware orchestration
  icon: i-heroicons-arrow-path-rounded-square
  to: /reference/entity-framework-integration
  ---
  Reuse ambient EF connections or spin up savepoint-backed scopes with generated orchestrator wiring.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Minimal API ready
  icon: i-heroicons-adjustments-horizontal
  to: /reference/api-integration
  ---
  Attach generated route handlers and streaming endpoints without abandoning standard `MapGet`/`MapPost` flows.
  ::

:::

## Get productive in minutes
Follow the guided flow to scaffold your generator project, warm the metadata cache, and ship typed clients.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Understand the workflow
  icon: i-heroicons-question-mark-circle
  to: /getting-started/what-is-xtraq
  ---
  Learn how snapshots, configuration, and generation combine to keep your client code deterministic.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Run the quickstart
  icon: i-heroicons-rocket-launch
  to: /getting-started/quickstart
  ---
  Scaffold a project, capture metadata, and generate artefacts ready to drop into your solution.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Explore the CLI
  icon: i-heroicons-command-line
  to: /cli
  ---
  Dive into every command, flag, and workflow for local development and CI/CD automation.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Browse the reference
  icon: i-heroicons-book-open
  to: /reference
  ---
  Dive into configuration, naming, and binding guides before customising your generator.
  ::

:::

## Stay connected
Join the community, track releases, and deploy the global tool from the platforms you already use.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Star the project
  icon: i-simple-icons-github
  to: https://github.com/nuetzliches/xtraq
  target: _blank
  ---
  Follow development, open issues, and discuss roadmap ideas with the maintainers.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Install from NuGet
  icon: i-simple-icons-nuget
  to: https://www.nuget.org/packages/xtraq
  target: _blank
  ---
  Pull the latest global tool release directly into your tooling pipeline.
  ::

:::

::

Commit message:

Update docs and tests for .NET 10 default, telemetry
Documentation now highlights .NET 10 as the default target framework, with .NET 8 compatibility notes. Minimal API samples and references are updated to exclusively target .NET 10. CLI telemetry alignment decision is documented, confirming local-only telemetry with new automated test coverage in CliTelemetryServiceTests. Test infrastructure adds workspace and executor collections to coordinate global state. Removed Directory.Build.props and preview SDK suppression, reflecting .NET 10 GA status.

docs/content/index.md, after:

---
title: xtraq
description: Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.
layout: landing
navigation: false
seo:
  title: Stored procedure automation for .NET
  description: Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.
---

::u-page-hero{class="py-12 sm:py-16 lg:py-20"}
#title
Stored procedure automation for .NET

#description
Snapshot your database, generate typed clients, and keep .NET applications aligned with your stored procedures—no hand-written plumbing required.

#links
:::u-button
---
color: primary
size: xl
to: /getting-started/installation
trailing-icon: i-lucide-arrow-right
---

Install the CLI
:::

:::u-button
---
color: neutral
icon: simple-icons-github
size: xl
to: https://github.com/nuetzliches/xtraq
variant: outline
target: \_blank
---

Star on GitHub
:::

#image
:::u-color-mode-image
---
light: /xtraq-logo.svg
dark: /xtraq-logo.svg
alt: xtraq logomark
class: w-40 mx-auto
---

:::
::

::u-container{align="center"}

## Why teams choose xtraq
Focus on SQL-first architecture while shipping .NET clients that stay in sync with every schema change.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Stored procedure first
  icon: i-heroicons-shield-check
  ---
  Respect existing database boundaries, permissions, and auditing while exposing a clean client surface.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Strongly typed artefacts
  icon: i-heroicons-cube-transparent
  ---
  Generate inputs, outputs, and helpers that target .NET 10 by default while retaining .NET 8 compatibility.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: JSON aware by design
  icon: i-heroicons-code-bracket
  ---
  Capture nested JSON payloads, table-valued parameters, and multi-result sets without manual parsing.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Fluent pipeline design
  icon: i-heroicons-sparkles
  to: /reference/api-integration
  ---
  Compose policies, transactions, and streaming helpers without losing strongly typed procedures.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Transaction-aware orchestration
  icon: i-heroicons-arrow-path-rounded-square
  to: /reference/entity-framework-integration
  ---
  Reuse ambient EF connections or spin up savepoint-backed scopes with generated orchestrator wiring.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Minimal API ready
  icon: i-heroicons-adjustments-horizontal
  to: /reference/api-integration
  ---
  Attach generated route handlers and streaming endpoints without abandoning standard `MapGet`/`MapPost` flows.
  ::

:::

## Get productive in minutes
Follow the guided flow to scaffold your generator project, warm the metadata cache, and ship typed clients.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Understand the workflow
  icon: i-heroicons-question-mark-circle
  to: /getting-started/what-is-xtraq
  ---
  Learn how snapshots, configuration, and generation combine to keep your client code deterministic.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Run the quickstart
  icon: i-heroicons-rocket-launch
  to: /getting-started/quickstart
  ---
  Scaffold a project, capture metadata, and generate artefacts ready to drop into your solution.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Explore the CLI
  icon: i-heroicons-command-line
  to: /cli
  ---
  Dive into every command, flag, and workflow for local development and CI/CD automation.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Browse the reference
  icon: i-heroicons-book-open
  to: /reference
  ---
  Dive into configuration, naming, and binding guides before customising your generator.
  ::

:::

## Stay connected
Join the community, track releases, and deploy the global tool from the platforms you already use.

:::card-group{align="left"}

  ::card
  ---
  title: Star the project
  icon: i-simple-icons-github
  to: https://github.com/nuetzliches/xtraq
  target: _blank
  ---
  Follow development, open issues, and discuss roadmap ideas with the maintainers.
  ::

  ::card
  ---
  title: Install from NuGet
  icon: i-simple-icons-nuget
  to: https://www.nuget.org/packages/xtraq
  target: _blank
  ---
  Pull the latest global tool release directly into your tooling pipeline.
  ::

:::

::
