docs/content/4.meta/4.cli-telemetry-alignment.md, before:

---
title: CLI Telemetry Alignment
description: Tracking the rollout of Xtraq's DOTNET CLI telemetry compliance.
---

## Status · 2025-11-18

- Stage 1 implements a local hashed usage channel that writes `.xtraq/telemetry/cli-usage.jsonl` per invocation.
- Opt-out now honours `DOTNET_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT`, `XTRAQ_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT`, and `XTRAQ_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT`, and telemetry is skipped automatically when common CI indicators are present.
- A first-run disclosure banner mirrors the .NET CLI wording and records consent state in `.xtraq/telemetry/cli-telemetry-consent.json`.
- Automated coverage under `tests/Xtraq.Tests/CliTelemetryServiceTests.cs` validates opt-out parsing, CI suppression, local persistence, and consent marker handling.

## Decision · Remain Local-Only

After reviewing the [official .NET CLI telemetry guidance](https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry) we have decided to **keep Xtraq's CLI telemetry local-only** for the time being.

- No anonymised aggregates are uploaded or transmitted off-device. The JSONL log is intended for manual diagnostics that teams can opt into when investigating CLI performance.
- Remote publishing would require an ingestion endpoint, retention policy, encryption in transit, and a privacy review. None of those pieces are in place yet, so we are deferring remote collection until the infrastructure exists.
- The disclosure banner now points to this page so users can verify exactly what is stored locally and how to opt out.

### Design Principles

1. **Consent first.** Telemetry is disabled automatically whenever any recognised opt-out variable is set or a CI environment is detected.
2. **Hash everything sensitive.** Paths, procedure filters, and machine identifiers are only stored as SHA256 hashes; raw values never touch disk.
3. **Keep the schema documented.** `CliTelemetryService` persists envelopes containing only command metadata and switch usage, mirroring the fields in `CliTelemetryEnvelope`.

## Next Steps

1. Revisit remote aggregation once we can host a privacy-reviewed ingestion endpoint (earliest Q2 2026).
2. Add a short CLI command (`xtraq telemetry export`) that redacts and packages local telemetry when users explicitly share diagnostics.
3. Publish a schema diagram for the telemetry envelope in the reference docs so downstream tooling can parse `.jsonl` files when needed.

## References

- [.NET CLI telemetry guidance](https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry)

Commit message:

Refactor CLI telemetry to strict opt-in and optimize catalog queries
CLI telemetry now requires explicit --telemetry and produces local-only JSON reports, removing environment variable and consent banner logic. Table column queries and dependency metadata providers now hydrate catalog-wide snapshots for improved performance, reducing per-object queries. Documentation and sample configs updated to reflect new telemetry and analyzer behaviors.

docs/content/4.meta/4.cli-telemetry-alignment.md, after:

---
title: CLI Telemetry Alignment
description: Tracking the rollout of Xtraq's DOTNET CLI telemetry compliance.
---

## Status · 2025-11-21

- Telemetry strictly opt-in via the `--telemetry` switch; no background usage channel runs by default.
- The legacy `.xtraq/telemetry/cli-usage.jsonl` log, consent markers, and environment-based opt-outs have been removed.
- When telemetry is enabled, the CLI writes scoped JSON documents (for example `cli-command-*.json`, `snapshot-*.json`, `build-*.json`, and run summaries) that remain local-only.
- Automated coverage under `tests/Xtraq.Tests/CliTelemetryServiceTests.cs` verifies the opt-in persistence path and schema.

## Decision · Remain Local-Only

After reviewing the [official .NET CLI telemetry guidance](https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry) we have decided to **keep Xtraq's CLI telemetry local-only** for the time being.

- No anonymised aggregates are uploaded or transmitted off-device. The opt-in JSON reports exist solely for manual diagnostics when teams decide to capture them.
- Remote publishing would require an ingestion endpoint, retention policy, encryption in transit, and a privacy review. None of those pieces are in place yet, so we are deferring remote collection until the infrastructure exists.
- This page documents every artifact that `--telemetry` produces so teams can review the footprint before enabling it.

### Design Principles

1. **Explicit intent.** Telemetry only runs when the user provides `--telemetry`; no hidden environment toggles.
2. **Hash sensitive data.** Paths, procedure filters, and other potentially identifying values are hashed before touching disk.
3. **Document the schema.** `CliTelemetryService` persists command metadata in the same envelope described in the source comments so downstream tooling can reason about the files.

## Next Steps

1. Revisit remote aggregation once we can host a privacy-reviewed ingestion endpoint (earliest Q2 2026).
2. Add a short CLI command (`xtraq telemetry export`) that redacts and packages local telemetry when users explicitly share diagnostics.
3. Publish a schema diagram for the telemetry envelope in the reference docs so downstream tooling can parse the JSON files when needed.

## References

- [.NET CLI telemetry guidance](https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry)
