samples/restapi/README.md, before:

# Xtraq Sample REST API

This folder contains a lightweight ASP.NET Core minimal API that exercises the curated `samples/sql` database objects. It is intended for local development scenarios and integration-test experiments rather than production workloads.

## Prerequisites

- .NET 8 SDK or newer
- Running SQL Server instance seeded with the scripts under `samples/sql` (the Docker setup in `samples/mssql` exposes a ready-made container on port 1433)

## Configure the connection

1. Copy `appsettings.Template.json` to `appsettings.json`.
2. Replace `REPLACE_WITH_STRONG_PASSWORD` with the password you configured for the sample SQL Server.
3. Alternatively set the `XTRAQ_SAMPLE_SQL_CONNECTION` environment variable, which takes precedence over the JSON configuration.

## Useful commands

```cmd
:: Restore packages
 dotnet restore

:: Run the API (listens on http://localhost:5143 by default)
 dotnet run --project RestApiSample.csproj

:: Call the health endpoint
 curl http://localhost:5143/

:: Fetch the user catalogue
 curl http://localhost:5143/api/users

:: List orders for a user
 curl http://localhost:5143/api/users/1/orders

:: Create an order (sample payload)
 curl -X POST http://localhost:5143/api/users/1/orders ^
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" ^
      -d "{\"orderNumber\":\"WEB-1001\",\"totalAmount\":49.99,\"currency\":\"USD\"}"
```

## Nullability contract

- The generated client library under `samples/restapi/Xtraq` ships with `#nullable enable` in every file and the sample project treats nullable flow warnings (`CS86xx`, `CS8762`, `CS8763`) as errors to surface risky assumptions early.
- Keep `<Nullable>enable</Nullable>` (or `warnings` / `annotations`) turned on in any consumer project; otherwise the generated `string?` / `DateTime?` annotations degrade to comments instead of compile-time guarantees.
- Mirror the `WarningsAsErrors` list from `RestApiSample.csproj` if you copy these artifacts into your own solution. This prevents silent regressions when stored procedures evolve and shape changes introduce new nullable paths.
- Prefer interpreting `null`-annotated members exactly as declared. For example, `string? Email` indicates the column may be missing in SQL and should be checked before usage, whereas non-nullable scalars (`int`, `decimal`) are guaranteed by the generator because the source metadata marks them as `NOT NULL`.
- When exposing the generated models on HTTP or other boundaries, consider adding explicit validation to fail-fast on unexpected `null` payloads instead of relying solely on the annotations.

Commit message:

Update docs and tests for .NET 10 default, telemetry
Documentation now highlights .NET 10 as the default target framework, with .NET 8 compatibility notes. Minimal API samples and references are updated to exclusively target .NET 10. CLI telemetry alignment decision is documented, confirming local-only telemetry with new automated test coverage in CliTelemetryServiceTests. Test infrastructure adds workspace and executor collections to coordinate global state. Removed Directory.Build.props and preview SDK suppression, reflecting .NET 10 GA status.

samples/restapi/README.md, after:

# Xtraq Sample REST API

This folder contains a lightweight ASP.NET Core minimal API that exercises the curated `samples/sql` database objects. It is intended for local development scenarios and integration-test experiments rather than production workloads.

## Prerequisites

- .NET 10 SDK — the sample defaults to net10.0 but still multi-targets net8.0 for compatibility
- Running SQL Server instance seeded with the scripts under `samples/sql` (the Docker setup in `samples/mssql` exposes a ready-made container on port 1433)

## Configure the connection

1. Copy `appsettings.Template.json` to `appsettings.json`.
2. Replace `REPLACE_WITH_STRONG_PASSWORD` with the password you configured for the sample SQL Server.
3. Alternatively set the `XTRAQ_SAMPLE_SQL_CONNECTION` environment variable, which takes precedence over the JSON configuration.

## Useful commands

```cmd
:: Restore packages
 dotnet restore

:: Run the API (listens on http://localhost:5143 by default)
 dotnet run --project RestApiSample.csproj

:: Call the health endpoint
 curl http://localhost:5143/

:: Fetch the user catalogue
 curl http://localhost:5143/api/users

:: List orders for a user
 curl http://localhost:5143/api/users/1/orders

:: Create an order (sample payload)
 curl -X POST http://localhost:5143/api/users/1/orders ^
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" ^
      -d "{\"orderNumber\":\"WEB-1001\",\"totalAmount\":49.99,\"currency\":\"USD\"}"
```

## Nullability contract

- The generated client library under `samples/restapi/Xtraq` ships with `#nullable enable` in every file and the sample project treats nullable flow warnings (`CS86xx`, `CS8762`, `CS8763`) as errors to surface risky assumptions early.
- Keep `<Nullable>enable</Nullable>` (or `warnings` / `annotations`) turned on in any consumer project; otherwise the generated `string?` / `DateTime?` annotations degrade to comments instead of compile-time guarantees.
- Mirror the `WarningsAsErrors` list from `RestApiSample.csproj` if you copy these artifacts into your own solution. This prevents silent regressions when stored procedures evolve and shape changes introduce new nullable paths.
- Prefer interpreting `null`-annotated members exactly as declared. For example, `string? Email` indicates the column may be missing in SQL and should be checked before usage, whereas non-nullable scalars (`int`, `decimal`) are guaranteed by the generator because the source metadata marks them as `NOT NULL`.
- When exposing the generated models on HTTP or other boundaries, consider adding explicit validation to fail-fast on unexpected `null` payloads instead of relying solely on the annotations.
