docs/content/5.roadmap/index.md, before:

---
title: Roadmap
description: Tracking upcoming work and temporary deferrals.
---

## Test Matrix

- [x] Re-enable CI execution for .NET 10 once integration test runtime stabilises. _(Matrix now covers net8.0 and net10.0 using the latest preview SDK while we wait for GA.)_
- [x] Extend the publish pipeline so the global tool ships a net10.0 asset once the hosted runners expose a compatible SDK or we provide it explicitly. _(Workflow installs the preview SDK and packs multi-target assets.)_

## Default Target Framework

- [x] Update `src\Configuration\Constants.cs` and `src\Configuration\TargetFrameworkEnum.cs` to set .NET 10.0 as the default target framework for new projects and remove legacy frameworks from the enum. _(Default now targets net10.0; legacy entries trimmed to net8.0/net10.0 coverage.)_

## ResultSet Naming

Recent changes shipped the CTE-aware resolver, JSON root alias extraction, and the streaming helper surface (`ProcedureExecutor.StreamResultSetAsync` plus generated `StreamResult…Async` wrappers). The checklist below captures what landed during the naming work and helps track any follow-up tasks.

- [x] Infer final SELECT base table for CTE-backed procedures to enable renames. _(Handled via CTE-aware `ResultSetNameResolver` and `TryResolve_WithCteReference_UsesBaseTable` test.)_
- [x] Add explicit regression tests that dynamic SQL (`EXEC(@sql)`) keeps generic result-set names. _(Covered via `ResultSetNameResolverTests`.)_
- [x] Add negative tests covering deliberately invalid SQL to verify generic fallback behavior. _(Result set naming falls back in `TryResolve_WithInvalidSql_ReturnsNull`.)_
- [x] `FOR JSON PATH` root alias extraction so JSON-only result sets can reuse the declared root name. _(Handled via `ResultSetNameResolver.TryResolve` and `TryResolve_WithForJsonRootAlias_UsesRootName` test.)_
- [x] Finalise and document the streaming naming convention once helper APIs ship. _(Helpers emit `StreamResult{Suffix}Async`; documented in `docs/content/3.reference/5.result-set-naming.md`.)_

## Procedure Extensibility

- [x] Prototype an opt-in fluent builder that wraps generated `IXtraqDbContext` extensions without leaking into the artifact surface. _(Emitted as `ProcedureBuilderExtensions` with fluent `ProcedureCallBuilder` support.)_
- [x] Provide streaming-aware builder overloads so fluent composition can opt into `StreamResult…Async` pipes instead of buffering by default. _(Includes `ProcedureStreamBuilder` with aggregation helpers.)_
- [x] Document recommended layering (application partials vs. external builders) alongside guidance for DI scoping and XML comments, based on the evaluation in `docs/content/3.reference/1.api-integration.md`.

## Transaction API

- [x] Introduce a DI-scoped transaction orchestrator that keeps a shared connection per request and uses savepoint-backed nesting to expose explicit `Begin/Commit/RollbackAsync` helpers. _(Template now supports savepoint nesting, scoped DI resolution, and `RequiresNew` transactions with independent connection disposal validated through dynamic compilation tests.)_
- [x] Extend generated DbContext options and service registrations so consumers can resolve the orchestrator without breaking existing usage patterns or hand-written partials. _(Options now surface a `TransactionOrchestratorFactory` hook and DI registers `IXtraqTransactionOrchestrator` by default.)_
- [x] Expose transaction-aware execution policies so global defaults or per-procedure overrides (e.g., ambient participation, isolation level) can be configured declaratively. _(TransactionScope execution policy template ships with selector overloads, generator emission, and dynamic tests covering commit/rollback paths.)_
- [x] Ensure the pipeline execution context resolves the orchestrator via dependency injection, enabling policies to coordinate with logging and telemetry components. _(Procedure pipelines now require an accessor-backed `IXtraqDbContext` and surface the orchestrator via `ProcedureExecutionContext`.)_
- [x] Align the design with the planned Entity Framework integration by supporting ambient `DbContext` transactions and connection reuse when both stacks operate side by side. _(Ambient transaction accessor enables EF-provided connections/transactions to flow without duplicate commits; dynamic template tests cover shared commit and rollback paths.)_
- [x] Backfill regression tests covering nested savepoint flows, auto-rollback on dispose, and streaming pipeline compatibility. _(Dynamic template tests now assert nested savepoints, `RequiresNew` scopes, dispose-triggered rollbacks, and both call/stream pipelines.)_
- [x] Document orchestrator usage, DI configuration, and migration guidance alongside the SpocR transition playbook. _(Reference docs now cover the EF ambient accessor in `docs/content/3.reference/6.entity-framework-integration.md` and the migration playbook links the guidance.)_

## Fluent Pipeline Iteration

- [x] Reshape the fluent surface into dedicated configuration and execution types (`ProcedureCallPipeline`, `ProcedureCallExecution`) so interceptors, validation, and telemetry wrap the pipeline without deep delegate nesting. _(Implemented via the new `ProcedurePipelineExtensions` template and updated unit tests.)_
- [x] Introduce composable execution policies (`IProcedureExecutionPolicy`) with `WithPolicy(...)` wiring for retry, timeout, and circuit-breaking concerns. _(Policies now wrap execution through `ProcedureCallPipeline.ApplyPolicies`.)_
- [x] Add optional pipeline labels (for example `WithLabel("post-map")`) that emit structured diagnostics and metric scopes for downstream observability tooling. _(Labels flow through `ProcedureExecutionContext` and policy capture tests.)_
- [x] Retire the initial `ProcedureCallBuilder`/`ProcedureStreamBuilder` shapes and align namespaces/method signatures with the refined design while we are still in alpha. _(Legacy builders removed from `ProcedureBuilders.xqt`; docs & tests updated.)_

## Minimal API Integration

- [x] Ship `RouteHandlerBuilder` extensions (for example `.WithProcedure(...)`) that bind the fluent pipeline to standard `MapGet`/`MapPost` delegates without replacing the Minimal API entry points. _(Emitted via `ProcedureRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions` behind `#if NET8_0_OR_GREATER && XTRAQ_MINIMAL_API`; enable the symbol in consuming apps to opt in.)_
- [x] Provide streaming helpers that expose `IAsyncEnumerable` and NDJSON writer adapters while returning `RouteHandlerBuilder`, reusing the existing fluent streaming semantics. _(Implemented via `WithProcedureStream` with a default NDJSON response filter and optional custom writers.)_
- [x] Deliver optional scaffolding (template, analyzer, or source generator) that emits the `.WithProcedure...` calls beside generated procedures to standardise adoption. _(Implemented via `ProcedureRouteHandlerScaffolding`)_

## Template Conventions

- [x] Rename generator templates from `.spt` to `.xqt` so IDEs treat them as Xtraq-specific artifacts while loaders and cache hashing stay in sync. _(Template loaders, tests, and embedded resources now target `.xqt`.)_

## Framework Integrations

- [ ] Offer `UseXtraqProcedures` extensions for EF `DbContext` that register the generated `IXtraqDbContext` within the same DI scope, reusing EF's connection pooling and transaction management via `DbContext.Database.GetDbConnection()`.
- [ ] Add an adapter layer (`ProcedureResultEntityAdapter`) that maps procedure rows into tracked EF entities or keyless query types to enable hybrid read patterns without manual mapping.
- [ ] Support EF interceptors so procedure executions can join ambient transactions and leverage EF's logging providers, keeping configuration consistent across direct EF queries and Xtraq procedure calls.

## Telemetry

- [ ] Evaluate whether to migrate CLI telemetry to align with the guidance at https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry and document the rollout decision.

## Documentation Alignment

- [ ] Highlight .NET 10.0 as the primary/default target framework across documentation and samples.
- [ ] Remove the remaining .NET 8.0 examples from `docs/content/3.reference/1.api-integration.md` once replacement guidance is ready.

## Table Types

First milestone: slim the table-type surface so `dotnet build` only emits UDTT wrappers actually used by the procedures we keep. That means teaching the metadata layer to map **procedure → table type** dependencies, then trimming both snapshotting and generator phases to that set.

- [x] Scope snapshotting and generation to table types referenced by allow-listed procedures (parameter usage or AST-detected consumption).
  - [x] Extend the metadata snapshot so each `ProcedureDescriptor` carries the names of referenced UDTT parameters (source: `ProcedureParameter.TableTypeName`).
  - [x] When `BuildSchemas` or `XTRAQ_BUILD_SCHEMAS` filters are active, build a `HashSet` of required table types before invoking `TableTypesGenerator`.
  - [x] Update `TableTypesGenerator.Generate` to accept (or compute) that filtered set so we stop writing unused UDTT artifacts.
  - [x] Regression tests: run the sample generator with a one-schema allow list and assert only referenced table types land in `samples/restapi/Xtraq`.
- [x] Enable cross-schema table type emission based on dependency analysis so schema allow-lists no longer gate referenced types.
- [x] Extend validation tests to cover allow-list filtering with `XTRAQ_BUILD_SCHEMAS`.
- [x] Document binder customization hooks for UDTT execution.
- [x] Evaluate an analyzer that verifies `ITableType` usage matches expected schema parameters.

## Cache Invalidation Reliability

- [x] Persist the last observed `modify_date` from `SchemaInvalidationResult.NextReferenceTimestamp` instead of the flush timestamp so mid-run catalog changes are never skipped between runs.
- [x] Detect dropped schema objects (procedures, functions, UDTTs) and remove their cache entries plus generated artifacts; add regression coverage for drop scenarios.
- [x] Extend dependency capture beyond `sys.sql_expression_dependencies` so UDTT parameter usage and other metadata-only relationships invalidate dependent procedures correctly. _(UDTT dependencies now flow through `SchemaChangeDetectionService.AppendUserDefinedTableTypeDependenciesAsync`, with coverage in `SchemaInvalidationOrchestratorTests.AnalyzeAndInvalidateAsync_WhenUdttModified_InvalidatesDependentProcedure`.)_
- [x] Add integration tests around chained invalidations to prove the breadth-first traversal covers transitive dependencies across cached warm runs. _(Validated via `SchemaInvalidationOrchestratorTests.AnalyzeAndInvalidateAsync_WhenDependencyChainChanges_InvalidatesTransitiveDependents`.)_

## Schema Change Detection Resilience

- [x] Stop calling `ToUniversalTime()` on SQL Server `modify_date` values (Kind == Unspecified) to avoid skew when the CLI host runs in a different time zone than the database server; normalise using explicit kind handling. _(Handled via `SchemaChangeDetectionService.NormalizeSqlTimestamp`, which standardises timestamps without applying local offsets.)_
- [x] Introduce regression tests that simulate time zone offsets and verify delta windows still surface the expected object set. _(Covered by `SchemaChangeDetectionServiceTests`, which assert that unspecified timestamps keep their tick values while local timestamps still convert to UTC.)_

## Next Steps

- Evaluate analyzers or source generators that flag Minimal API routes missing generated scaffolding so teams can opt-in gradually without regressions.

Commit message:

Add EF Core adapter for Xtraq procedure integration
Introduces a UseXtraqProcedures<TDbContext>() extension and internal EntityFrameworkXtraqContext adapter to enable generated procedures to participate in ambient EF Core transactions and reuse DbContext connection pooling. Updates documentation and roadmap to reflect the new integration, and adds tests and dependencies for EF Core and SqlClient support.

docs/content/5.roadmap/index.md, after:

---
title: Roadmap
description: Tracking upcoming work and temporary deferrals.
---

## Test Matrix

- [x] Re-enable CI execution for .NET 10 once integration test runtime stabilises. _(Matrix now covers net8.0 and net10.0 using the latest preview SDK while we wait for GA.)_
- [x] Extend the publish pipeline so the global tool ships a net10.0 asset once the hosted runners expose a compatible SDK or we provide it explicitly. _(Workflow installs the preview SDK and packs multi-target assets.)_

## Default Target Framework

- [x] Update `src\Configuration\Constants.cs` and `src\Configuration\TargetFrameworkEnum.cs` to set .NET 10.0 as the default target framework for new projects and remove legacy frameworks from the enum. _(Default now targets net10.0; legacy entries trimmed to net8.0/net10.0 coverage.)_

## ResultSet Naming

Recent changes shipped the CTE-aware resolver, JSON root alias extraction, and the streaming helper surface (`ProcedureExecutor.StreamResultSetAsync` plus generated `StreamResult…Async` wrappers). The checklist below captures what landed during the naming work and helps track any follow-up tasks.

- [x] Infer final SELECT base table for CTE-backed procedures to enable renames. _(Handled via CTE-aware `ResultSetNameResolver` and `TryResolve_WithCteReference_UsesBaseTable` test.)_
- [x] Add explicit regression tests that dynamic SQL (`EXEC(@sql)`) keeps generic result-set names. _(Covered via `ResultSetNameResolverTests`.)_
- [x] Add negative tests covering deliberately invalid SQL to verify generic fallback behavior. _(Result set naming falls back in `TryResolve_WithInvalidSql_ReturnsNull`.)_
- [x] `FOR JSON PATH` root alias extraction so JSON-only result sets can reuse the declared root name. _(Handled via `ResultSetNameResolver.TryResolve` and `TryResolve_WithForJsonRootAlias_UsesRootName` test.)_
- [x] Finalise and document the streaming naming convention once helper APIs ship. _(Helpers emit `StreamResult{Suffix}Async`; documented in `docs/content/3.reference/5.result-set-naming.md`.)_

## Procedure Extensibility

- [x] Prototype an opt-in fluent builder that wraps generated `IXtraqDbContext` extensions without leaking into the artifact surface. _(Emitted as `ProcedureBuilderExtensions` with fluent `ProcedureCallBuilder` support.)_
- [x] Provide streaming-aware builder overloads so fluent composition can opt into `StreamResult…Async` pipes instead of buffering by default. _(Includes `ProcedureStreamBuilder` with aggregation helpers.)_
- [x] Document recommended layering (application partials vs. external builders) alongside guidance for DI scoping and XML comments, based on the evaluation in `docs/content/3.reference/1.api-integration.md`.

## Transaction API

- [x] Introduce a DI-scoped transaction orchestrator that keeps a shared connection per request and uses savepoint-backed nesting to expose explicit `Begin/Commit/RollbackAsync` helpers. _(Template now supports savepoint nesting, scoped DI resolution, and `RequiresNew` transactions with independent connection disposal validated through dynamic compilation tests.)_
- [x] Extend generated DbContext options and service registrations so consumers can resolve the orchestrator without breaking existing usage patterns or hand-written partials. _(Options now surface a `TransactionOrchestratorFactory` hook and DI registers `IXtraqTransactionOrchestrator` by default.)_
- [x] Expose transaction-aware execution policies so global defaults or per-procedure overrides (e.g., ambient participation, isolation level) can be configured declaratively. _(TransactionScope execution policy template ships with selector overloads, generator emission, and dynamic tests covering commit/rollback paths.)_
- [x] Ensure the pipeline execution context resolves the orchestrator via dependency injection, enabling policies to coordinate with logging and telemetry components. _(Procedure pipelines now require an accessor-backed `IXtraqDbContext` and surface the orchestrator via `ProcedureExecutionContext`.)_
- [x] Align the design with the planned Entity Framework integration by supporting ambient `DbContext` transactions and connection reuse when both stacks operate side by side. _(Ambient transaction accessor enables EF-provided connections/transactions to flow without duplicate commits; dynamic template tests cover shared commit and rollback paths.)_
- [x] Backfill regression tests covering nested savepoint flows, auto-rollback on dispose, and streaming pipeline compatibility. _(Dynamic template tests now assert nested savepoints, `RequiresNew` scopes, dispose-triggered rollbacks, and both call/stream pipelines.)_
- [x] Document orchestrator usage, DI configuration, and migration guidance alongside the SpocR transition playbook. _(Reference docs now cover the EF ambient accessor in `docs/content/3.reference/6.entity-framework-integration.md` and the migration playbook links the guidance.)_

## Fluent Pipeline Iteration

- [x] Reshape the fluent surface into dedicated configuration and execution types (`ProcedureCallPipeline`, `ProcedureCallExecution`) so interceptors, validation, and telemetry wrap the pipeline without deep delegate nesting. _(Implemented via the new `ProcedurePipelineExtensions` template and updated unit tests.)_
- [x] Introduce composable execution policies (`IProcedureExecutionPolicy`) with `WithPolicy(...)` wiring for retry, timeout, and circuit-breaking concerns. _(Policies now wrap execution through `ProcedureCallPipeline.ApplyPolicies`.)_
- [x] Add optional pipeline labels (for example `WithLabel("post-map")`) that emit structured diagnostics and metric scopes for downstream observability tooling. _(Labels flow through `ProcedureExecutionContext` and policy capture tests.)_
- [x] Retire the initial `ProcedureCallBuilder`/`ProcedureStreamBuilder` shapes and align namespaces/method signatures with the refined design while we are still in alpha. _(Legacy builders removed from `ProcedureBuilders.xqt`; docs & tests updated.)_

## Minimal API Integration

- [x] Ship `RouteHandlerBuilder` extensions (for example `.WithProcedure(...)`) that bind the fluent pipeline to standard `MapGet`/`MapPost` delegates without replacing the Minimal API entry points. _(Emitted via `ProcedureRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions` behind `#if NET8_0_OR_GREATER && XTRAQ_MINIMAL_API`; enable the symbol in consuming apps to opt in.)_
- [x] Provide streaming helpers that expose `IAsyncEnumerable` and NDJSON writer adapters while returning `RouteHandlerBuilder`, reusing the existing fluent streaming semantics. _(Implemented via `WithProcedureStream` with a default NDJSON response filter and optional custom writers.)_
- [x] Deliver optional scaffolding (template, analyzer, or source generator) that emits the `.WithProcedure...` calls beside generated procedures to standardise adoption. _(Implemented via `ProcedureRouteHandlerScaffolding`)_

## Template Conventions

- [x] Rename generator templates from `.spt` to `.xqt` so IDEs treat them as Xtraq-specific artifacts while loaders and cache hashing stay in sync. _(Template loaders, tests, and embedded resources now target `.xqt`.)_

## Framework Integrations

- [x] Offer `UseXtraqProcedures` extensions for EF `DbContext` that register the generated `IXtraqDbContext` within the same DI scope, reusing EF's connection pooling and transaction management via `DbContext.Database.GetDbConnection()`. _(Template emits the adapter and extension; documentation updated in `docs/content/3.reference/3.entity-framework-integration.md`.)_
- [ ] Add an adapter layer (`ProcedureResultEntityAdapter`) that maps procedure rows into tracked EF entities or keyless query types to enable hybrid read patterns without manual mapping.
- [ ] Support EF interceptors so procedure executions can join ambient transactions and leverage EF's logging providers, keeping configuration consistent across direct EF queries and Xtraq procedure calls.

## Telemetry

- [ ] Evaluate whether to migrate CLI telemetry to align with the guidance at https://aka.ms/dotnet-cli-telemetry and document the rollout decision.

## Documentation Alignment

- [ ] Highlight .NET 10.0 as the primary/default target framework across documentation and samples.
- [ ] Remove the remaining .NET 8.0 examples from `docs/content/3.reference/1.api-integration.md` once replacement guidance is ready.

## Table Types

First milestone: slim the table-type surface so `dotnet build` only emits UDTT wrappers actually used by the procedures we keep. That means teaching the metadata layer to map **procedure → table type** dependencies, then trimming both snapshotting and generator phases to that set.

- [x] Scope snapshotting and generation to table types referenced by allow-listed procedures (parameter usage or AST-detected consumption).
  - [x] Extend the metadata snapshot so each `ProcedureDescriptor` carries the names of referenced UDTT parameters (source: `ProcedureParameter.TableTypeName`).
  - [x] When `BuildSchemas` or `XTRAQ_BUILD_SCHEMAS` filters are active, build a `HashSet` of required table types before invoking `TableTypesGenerator`.
  - [x] Update `TableTypesGenerator.Generate` to accept (or compute) that filtered set so we stop writing unused UDTT artifacts.
  - [x] Regression tests: run the sample generator with a one-schema allow list and assert only referenced table types land in `samples/restapi/Xtraq`.
- [x] Enable cross-schema table type emission based on dependency analysis so schema allow-lists no longer gate referenced types.
- [x] Extend validation tests to cover allow-list filtering with `XTRAQ_BUILD_SCHEMAS`.
- [x] Document binder customization hooks for UDTT execution.
- [x] Evaluate an analyzer that verifies `ITableType` usage matches expected schema parameters.

## Cache Invalidation Reliability

- [x] Persist the last observed `modify_date` from `SchemaInvalidationResult.NextReferenceTimestamp` instead of the flush timestamp so mid-run catalog changes are never skipped between runs.
- [x] Detect dropped schema objects (procedures, functions, UDTTs) and remove their cache entries plus generated artifacts; add regression coverage for drop scenarios.
- [x] Extend dependency capture beyond `sys.sql_expression_dependencies` so UDTT parameter usage and other metadata-only relationships invalidate dependent procedures correctly. _(UDTT dependencies now flow through `SchemaChangeDetectionService.AppendUserDefinedTableTypeDependenciesAsync`, with coverage in `SchemaInvalidationOrchestratorTests.AnalyzeAndInvalidateAsync_WhenUdttModified_InvalidatesDependentProcedure`.)_
- [x] Add integration tests around chained invalidations to prove the breadth-first traversal covers transitive dependencies across cached warm runs. _(Validated via `SchemaInvalidationOrchestratorTests.AnalyzeAndInvalidateAsync_WhenDependencyChainChanges_InvalidatesTransitiveDependents`.)_

## Schema Change Detection Resilience

- [x] Stop calling `ToUniversalTime()` on SQL Server `modify_date` values (Kind == Unspecified) to avoid skew when the CLI host runs in a different time zone than the database server; normalise using explicit kind handling. _(Handled via `SchemaChangeDetectionService.NormalizeSqlTimestamp`, which standardises timestamps without applying local offsets.)_
- [x] Introduce regression tests that simulate time zone offsets and verify delta windows still surface the expected object set. _(Covered by `SchemaChangeDetectionServiceTests`, which assert that unspecified timestamps keep their tick values while local timestamps still convert to UTC.)_

## Next Steps

- Evaluate analyzers or source generators that flag Minimal API routes missing generated scaffolding so teams can opt-in gradually without regressions.
