docs/content/3.reference/4.json-procedures.md, before:

---
title: JSON Procedure Handling
description: xtraq recognises procedures that project JSON via `FOR JSON` or `JSON_QUERY` and keeps enough metadata to generate strongly typed clients. This guide explains how the metadata is captured during `xtraq snapshot`, how it turns into generated code during `xtraq build`, and what conventions keep the experience predictable.
---

## Detection During `xtraq snapshot`

The SnapshotBuilder reparses every stored procedure definition with ScriptDom. Whenever it encounters a top-level `SELECT … FOR JSON`, the first result set is flagged as JSON. Nested `FOR JSON` subqueries and `JSON_QUERY` calls are marked so that the metadata describes the full JSON tree.

- Only the first result set participates in JSON materialisation. Additional sets are treated as ordinary tabular projections.
- `FOR JSON PATH, ROOT('...')` populates the `RootProperty` flag so downstream tooling can reproduce the same hierarchy.
- `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` turns the payload into a single JSON object. Without this option xtraq assumes an array payload.
- `JSON_QUERY` is treated as a JSON container even if it mixes with scalar projections. This keeps nested JSON from being double-encoded.

### Snapshot Flags

| Field                                            | Scope      | Meaning                                                                               |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `ResultSets[i].ReturnsJson`                      | Result set | `true` when the set materialises JSON payloads.                                       |
| `ResultSets[i].ReturnsJsonArray`                 | Result set | `true` for array payloads, `false` when `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` produces a singleton. |
| `ResultSets[i].JsonRootProperty`                 | Result set | Root element supplied via `ROOT('name')`; omitted when absent.                        |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].IsNestedJson`          | Column     | Column represents a nested JSON container inside a larger payload.                    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsJson`           | Column     | Column originates from a JSON expression (`FOR JSON` or `JSON_QUERY`).                |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsJsonArray`      | Column     | Nested column produces an array result (`true` when array).                           |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonRootProperty`      | Column     | Nested column root alias; omitted when absent.                                        |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonIncludeNullValues` | Column     | Column-level `INCLUDE_NULL_VALUES` flag is preserved to mirror the SQL projection.    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].DeferredJsonExpansion` | Column     | Column is backed by a function returning JSON and can be expanded later.              |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].FunctionRef`           | Column     | Fully-qualified reference to the function that produced the JSON blob.                |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].Alias`                 | Column     | Direct `AS ...` alias from SQL (if absent the analyzer infers one).                   |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].SourceColumn`          | Column     | Raw table column name persisted alongside `Name` when the projection is aliased.      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].TypeRef`               | Column     | Normalised system-type reference (for example `sys.nvarchar`) used for codegen.       |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].UserTypeRef`           | Column     | Fully-qualified user-defined type reference when the column binds to a UDTT/UDT.      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].SqlTypeName`           | Column     | Friendly SQL type description (includes casts, precision/scale where applicable).     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].IsNullable`            | Column     | `true` when the analyzer or schema metadata proves the column can be `NULL`.          |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].MaxLength`             | Column     | Emitted when the underlying SQL type exposes a length (varchar, nvarchar, etc.).      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonElementClrType`    | Column     | CLR type of JSON elements inside arrays (when we can infer them).                     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonElementSqlType`    | Column     | SQL type of JSON elements inside arrays (when we can infer them).                     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsUnknownJson`    | Column     | Analyzer could not determine the nested JSON shape; generator treats it as opaque.    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].Columns`               | Column     | Nested column collection for multi-level JSON hierarchies.                            |

`SourceColumn` makes it possible to reconcile deterministic aliases with their originating table columns without changing the meaning of the `Name` field that downstream code generators already consume.

### Name vs. Alias vs. SourceColumn

- `Name` stays the canonical identifier that the generator uses for DTO properties. It may be inferred, normalised, or de-duplicated to keep result sets deterministic.
- `Alias` mirrors the literal `AS SomeAlias` clause (when provided) so advanced tooling can reason about the authoring intent.
- `SourceColumn` preserves the underlying table column even when `Name` and `Alias` diverge (for example dotted aliases or collision suffixes). This is the safest place to look when you need the raw schema binding.

The snapshot file keeps the JSON structure, which makes it reproducible across snapshot runs and diffable in source control:

```jsonc
{
  "Schema": "identity",
  "Name": "UserListAsJson",
  "ResultSets": [
    {
      "ReturnsJson": true,
      "ReturnsJsonArray": true,
      "Columns": [
        { "Name": "userId", "TypeRef": "core._id" },
        { "Name": "record.rowVersion", "TypeRef": "sys.bigint" },
        {
          "Name": "roles",
          "ReturnsJson": true,
          "ReturnsJsonArray": true,
          "IsNestedJson": true,
          "Columns": [
            { "Name": "roleId", "TypeRef": "core._id" },
            { "Name": "displayName", "TypeRef": "core._label" },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
}
```

### Nested JSON and `JSON_QUERY`

- Aliases such as `AS [status.label]` or `AS [account.name]` become dotted names in the snapshot. The generator converts these aliases into nested record structs.
- `JSON_QUERY` is the recommended way to embed arrays or objects inside another JSON payload. The analyzer marks the column with `ReturnsJson` + `IsNestedJson` (and `ReturnsJsonArray` when appropriate), which prevents double escaping and preserves the nested structure in the snapshot.
- When a JSON payload comes from a user-defined function, the snapshot stores `FunctionRef` and sets `DeferredJsonExpansion`. During generation the function can be expanded into flat columns if metadata is available.

## Generation During `xtraq build`

The code generator inspects the JSON flags and produces record structs and projectors that deserialize the SQL payload with `System.Text.Json`.

- Each stored procedure outputs a single aggregate class (for example `UserListAsJsonResult`) that contains one `IReadOnlyList<T>` per JSON result set. The typed helper (`ProcedureNameAsync`) is always emitted.
- The generator produces typed and raw helpers by default. Raw helpers (`ProcedureNameRawAsync`) return the JSON payload exactly as emitted by SQL, while typed helpers materialize objects via the schema metadata.
- JSON result sets use `JsonSupport.Options`, a shared `JsonSerializerOptions` instance that enables case-insensitive binding, tolerates numbers stored as strings, and provides lenient converters for nested payloads.
- SQL is expected to return exactly one row per JSON result set. For arrays the row should contain a JSON array literal; for single objects use `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` so xtraq reads a single JSON object.
- When SQL returns `NULL`, the list stays empty. Single-object payloads are skipped when deserialization returns `null`.
- Pass `--json-include-null-values` when running `xtraq build`, or add `XTRAQ_JSON_INCLUDE_NULL_VALUES=1` to `.xtraqconfig`, whenever the project needs `[JsonIncludeNullValues]` attributes. Treat overrides (`.xtraqconfig.local`, environment variables) as short-lived exceptions rather than the norm.

### Deserialization Flow

```csharp
new("ResultSet1", async (reader, ct) =>
{
    var list = new List<object>();
    if (await reader.ReadAsync(ct).ConfigureAwait(false) && !reader.IsDBNull(0))
    {
        var json = reader.GetString(0);
        var records = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<List<UserListAsJsonResultSet1Result>>(json, JsonSupport.Options);
        if (records != null)
        {
            foreach (var item in records)
            {
                list.Add(item);
            }
        }
    }
    return list;
})
```

### Nested Records from Aliases

- Dotted aliases (`alias.property`) produce nested record structs (for example `UserListAsJsonResultSet1GenderResult`).
- Nested JSON columns without dotted aliases (for example arrays returned via `JSON_QUERY`) are currently surfaced as raw `string` properties. The snapshot still tracks their schema so that future generators or downstream tooling can project them.
- When `DeferredJsonExpansion` is set, the generator attempts to expand the referenced function into individual columns if the snapshot contains its JSON schema.

## Runtime Expectations

- Generated extensions expose a typed async method per procedure (`ProcedureNameAsync`) that returns the aggregate result. The aggregate includes `Success`, `Error`, optional output parameter records, and the JSON-backed result lists.
- Raw helpers (`ProcedureNameRawAsync`) and typed methods are emitted together. Both share the same command pipeline and respect cancellation tokens.
- Streaming and nested model helpers remain future work items. They are not gated by `.env` toggles anymore; once implemented they will be documented alongside their stability status.
- Raw JSON strings are emitted alongside typed helpers; consumers can still serialize the typed list (`JsonSerializer.Serialize(result.ResultSets[0])`) if they want to avoid the raw helper.

## Authoring Guidelines

- Prefer `FOR JSON PATH` for deterministic property names. `AUTO` is supported but more likely to produce schema drift.
- Use `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` when the procedure should return a single object rather than an array.
- Alias nested properties with dotted names to receive nested record structs in the generated code.
- Wrap nested arrays or complex objects with `JSON_QUERY` so the analyzer flags them as JSON containers instead of varchar literals.
- Keep column names stable – schema drift results in regenerated record structs and downstream compile breaks.

- `project.jsonTypeLogLevel` (or the environment variable `XTRAQ_JSON_TYPE_LOG_LEVEL`) controls how much JSON type enrichment logging reaches the console: `Detailed` (default), `SummaryOnly`, or `Off`.
- Set `XTRAQ_JSON_AST_DIAG=1` to emit detailed ScriptDom findings during analysis; combine with `XTRAQ_LOG_LEVEL=debug` for verbose tracing.
- `XTRAQ_JSON_AUDIT=1` writes a `debug/json-audit.txt` report after generation that summarises every JSON result set, including any future experimental features once they land.
- JSON output is now part of the default surface. Capture any issues in the checklist under review findings so we can track regressions while the feature stabilizes.
- Run `xtraq snapshot --no-cache --verbose` when SQL changes are not reflected in the snapshot – this forces a fresh parse and re-emits JSON diagnostics.

> For endpoint integration patterns and DTO mapping guidance (applicable to JSON and tabular procedures alike), see [Minimal APIs & DTO Mapping](./api-integration.md).

Commit message:

Document JSON chunk handling and add regression tests
Updated reference docs to clarify JSON chunk reassembly and nullable parameter binding in stored procedures. Added ProcedureExecutorJsonChunkTests to verify chunked JSON payloads are concatenated and deserialized correctly, and that nullable input parameters are bound as DBNull.Value.

docs/content/3.reference/4.json-procedures.md, after:

---
title: JSON Procedure Handling
description: xtraq recognises procedures that project JSON via `FOR JSON` or `JSON_QUERY` and keeps enough metadata to generate strongly typed clients. This guide explains how the metadata is captured during `xtraq snapshot`, how it turns into generated code during `xtraq build`, and what conventions keep the experience predictable.
---

## Detection During `xtraq snapshot`

The SnapshotBuilder reparses every stored procedure definition with ScriptDom. Whenever it encounters a top-level `SELECT … FOR JSON`, the first result set is flagged as JSON. Nested `FOR JSON` subqueries and `JSON_QUERY` calls are marked so that the metadata describes the full JSON tree.

- Only the first result set participates in JSON materialisation. Additional sets are treated as ordinary tabular projections.
- `FOR JSON PATH, ROOT('...')` populates the `RootProperty` flag so downstream tooling can reproduce the same hierarchy.
- `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` turns the payload into a single JSON object. Without this option xtraq assumes an array payload.
- `JSON_QUERY` is treated as a JSON container even if it mixes with scalar projections. This keeps nested JSON from being double-encoded.

### Snapshot Flags

| Field                                            | Scope      | Meaning                                                                               |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `ResultSets[i].ReturnsJson`                      | Result set | `true` when the set materialises JSON payloads.                                       |
| `ResultSets[i].ReturnsJsonArray`                 | Result set | `true` for array payloads, `false` when `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` produces a singleton. |
| `ResultSets[i].JsonRootProperty`                 | Result set | Root element supplied via `ROOT('name')`; omitted when absent.                        |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].IsNestedJson`          | Column     | Column represents a nested JSON container inside a larger payload.                    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsJson`           | Column     | Column originates from a JSON expression (`FOR JSON` or `JSON_QUERY`).                |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsJsonArray`      | Column     | Nested column produces an array result (`true` when array).                           |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonRootProperty`      | Column     | Nested column root alias; omitted when absent.                                        |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonIncludeNullValues` | Column     | Column-level `INCLUDE_NULL_VALUES` flag is preserved to mirror the SQL projection.    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].DeferredJsonExpansion` | Column     | Column is backed by a function returning JSON and can be expanded later.              |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].FunctionRef`           | Column     | Fully-qualified reference to the function that produced the JSON blob.                |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].Alias`                 | Column     | Direct `AS ...` alias from SQL (if absent the analyzer infers one).                   |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].SourceColumn`          | Column     | Raw table column name persisted alongside `Name` when the projection is aliased.      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].TypeRef`               | Column     | Normalised system-type reference (for example `sys.nvarchar`) used for codegen.       |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].UserTypeRef`           | Column     | Fully-qualified user-defined type reference when the column binds to a UDTT/UDT.      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].SqlTypeName`           | Column     | Friendly SQL type description (includes casts, precision/scale where applicable).     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].IsNullable`            | Column     | `true` when the analyzer or schema metadata proves the column can be `NULL`.          |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].MaxLength`             | Column     | Emitted when the underlying SQL type exposes a length (varchar, nvarchar, etc.).      |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonElementClrType`    | Column     | CLR type of JSON elements inside arrays (when we can infer them).                     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].JsonElementSqlType`    | Column     | SQL type of JSON elements inside arrays (when we can infer them).                     |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].ReturnsUnknownJson`    | Column     | Analyzer could not determine the nested JSON shape; generator treats it as opaque.    |
| `ResultSets[i].Columns[j].Columns`               | Column     | Nested column collection for multi-level JSON hierarchies.                            |

`SourceColumn` makes it possible to reconcile deterministic aliases with their originating table columns without changing the meaning of the `Name` field that downstream code generators already consume.

### Name vs. Alias vs. SourceColumn

- `Name` stays the canonical identifier that the generator uses for DTO properties. It may be inferred, normalised, or de-duplicated to keep result sets deterministic.
- `Alias` mirrors the literal `AS SomeAlias` clause (when provided) so advanced tooling can reason about the authoring intent.
- `SourceColumn` preserves the underlying table column even when `Name` and `Alias` diverge (for example dotted aliases or collision suffixes). This is the safest place to look when you need the raw schema binding.

The snapshot file keeps the JSON structure, which makes it reproducible across snapshot runs and diffable in source control:

```jsonc
{
  "Schema": "identity",
  "Name": "UserListAsJson",
  "ResultSets": [
    {
      "ReturnsJson": true,
      "ReturnsJsonArray": true,
      "Columns": [
        { "Name": "userId", "TypeRef": "core._id" },
        { "Name": "record.rowVersion", "TypeRef": "sys.bigint" },
        {
          "Name": "roles",
          "ReturnsJson": true,
          "ReturnsJsonArray": true,
          "IsNestedJson": true,
          "Columns": [
            { "Name": "roleId", "TypeRef": "core._id" },
            { "Name": "displayName", "TypeRef": "core._label" },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
}
```

### Nested JSON and `JSON_QUERY`

- Aliases such as `AS [status.label]` or `AS [account.name]` become dotted names in the snapshot. The generator converts these aliases into nested record structs.
- `JSON_QUERY` is the recommended way to embed arrays or objects inside another JSON payload. The analyzer marks the column with `ReturnsJson` + `IsNestedJson` (and `ReturnsJsonArray` when appropriate), which prevents double escaping and preserves the nested structure in the snapshot.
- When a JSON payload comes from a user-defined function, the snapshot stores `FunctionRef` and sets `DeferredJsonExpansion`. During generation the function can be expanded into flat columns if metadata is available.

## Generation During `xtraq build`

The code generator inspects the JSON flags and produces record structs and projectors that deserialize the SQL payload with `System.Text.Json`.

- Each stored procedure outputs a single aggregate class (for example `UserListAsJsonResult`) that contains one `IReadOnlyList<T>` per JSON result set. The typed helper (`ProcedureNameAsync`) is always emitted.
- The generator produces typed and raw helpers by default. Raw helpers (`ProcedureNameRawAsync`) return the JSON payload exactly as emitted by SQL, while typed helpers materialize objects via the schema metadata.
- JSON result sets use `JsonSupport.Options`, a shared `JsonSerializerOptions` instance that enables case-insensitive binding, tolerates numbers stored as strings, and provides lenient converters for nested payloads.
- SQL is expected to return exactly one row per JSON result set. For arrays the row should contain a JSON array literal; for single objects use `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` so xtraq reads a single JSON object.
- When SQL returns `NULL`, the list stays empty. Single-object payloads are skipped when deserialization returns `null`.
- Pass `--json-include-null-values` when running `xtraq build`, or add `XTRAQ_JSON_INCLUDE_NULL_VALUES=1` to `.xtraqconfig`, whenever the project needs `[JsonIncludeNullValues]` attributes. Treat overrides (`.xtraqconfig.local`, environment variables) as short-lived exceptions rather than the norm.

### Deserialization Flow

```csharp
new("ResultSet1", async (reader, ct) =>
{
    var list = new List<object>();
    if (await reader.ReadAsync(ct).ConfigureAwait(false) && !reader.IsDBNull(0))
    {
        var json = reader.GetString(0);
        var records = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<List<UserListAsJsonResultSet1Result>>(json, JsonSupport.Options);
        if (records != null)
        {
            foreach (var item in records)
            {
                list.Add(item);
            }
        }
    }
    return list;
})
```

### Nested Records from Aliases

- Dotted aliases (`alias.property`) produce nested record structs (for example `UserListAsJsonResultSet1GenderResult`).
- Nested JSON columns without dotted aliases (for example arrays returned via `JSON_QUERY`) are currently surfaced as raw `string` properties. The snapshot still tracks their schema so that future generators or downstream tooling can project them.
- When `DeferredJsonExpansion` is set, the generator attempts to expand the referenced function into individual columns if the snapshot contains its JSON schema.

## Runtime Expectations

- Generated extensions expose a typed async method per procedure (`ProcedureNameAsync`) that returns the aggregate result. The aggregate includes `Success`, `Error`, optional output parameter records, and the JSON-backed result lists.
- Raw helpers (`ProcedureNameRawAsync`) and typed methods are emitted together. Both share the same command pipeline and respect cancellation tokens.
- Streaming and nested model helpers remain future work items. They are not gated by `.env` toggles anymore; once implemented they will be documented alongside their stability status.
- Raw JSON strings are emitted alongside typed helpers; consumers can still serialize the typed list (`JsonSerializer.Serialize(result.ResultSets[0])`) if they want to avoid the raw helper.
- Stored procedures may stream large `FOR JSON` payloads across multiple rows. The generated projectors now concatenate all chunks before deserializing and keep `ResultRawJson` intact, so no payload is truncated.
- Nullable input parameters are bound as `DBNull.Value` when null to avoid SQL errors such as “Parameter ... not supplied”.

## Authoring Guidelines

- Prefer `FOR JSON PATH` for deterministic property names. `AUTO` is supported but more likely to produce schema drift.
- Use `WITHOUT_ARRAY_WRAPPER` when the procedure should return a single object rather than an array.
- Alias nested properties with dotted names to receive nested record structs in the generated code.
- Wrap nested arrays or complex objects with `JSON_QUERY` so the analyzer flags them as JSON containers instead of varchar literals.
- Keep column names stable – schema drift results in regenerated record structs and downstream compile breaks.

- `project.jsonTypeLogLevel` (or the environment variable `XTRAQ_JSON_TYPE_LOG_LEVEL`) controls how much JSON type enrichment logging reaches the console: `Detailed` (default), `SummaryOnly`, or `Off`.
- Set `XTRAQ_JSON_AST_DIAG=1` to emit detailed ScriptDom findings during analysis; combine with `XTRAQ_LOG_LEVEL=debug` for verbose tracing.
- `XTRAQ_JSON_AUDIT=1` writes a `debug/json-audit.txt` report after generation that summarises every JSON result set, including any future experimental features once they land.
- JSON output is now part of the default surface. Capture any issues in the checklist under review findings so we can track regressions while the feature stabilizes.
- Run `xtraq snapshot --no-cache --verbose` when SQL changes are not reflected in the snapshot – this forces a fresh parse and re-emits JSON diagnostics.

> For endpoint integration patterns and DTO mapping guidance (applicable to JSON and tabular procedures alike), see [Minimal APIs & DTO Mapping](./api-integration.md).
