docs/content/2.cli/commands/4.build.md, before:

---
title: build
description: Executes code generation based on current configuration. Generates runtime artefacts (table types, procedure wrappers, DbContext helpers) using the metadata stored under `.xtraq/snapshots/`. JSON helpers ship enabled by default—no preview flags required.
---

## Usage

```bash
xtraq build [options]
```

## Requirements

- A tracked `.xtraqconfig` generated by `xtraq init`. The command fails fast with guidance to initialise if the file is missing or invalid.
- Snapshot metadata under `.xtraq/snapshots/`. Invoke `xtraq build --refresh-snapshot` (the default when running plain `xtraq`) to capture metadata automatically.
- `XTRAQ_GENERATOR_DB` available via environment variables or `.env` **only** when a snapshot refresh is requested.

## Command-Specific Options

| Option               | Description                                                                             |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--refresh-snapshot` | Refreshes the snapshot before generating code (equivalent to running `xtraq snapshot`). |

Combine the command with global flags from the [CLI overview](../index.md) when needed:

- `-p, --project-path` selects another project root.
- `--procedure <schema.proc>` scopes work to selected stored procedures.
- `--telemetry` persists timing data to `.xtraq/telemetry/build-*.json`.
- `--json-include-null-values` ensures JSON generators emit `[JsonIncludeNullValues]` attributes.
- `--ci` forces plain-text output, `-v/--verbose` prints detailed phase messages.

## Behavior Contract

| Aspect        | Details                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Invocation    | `xtraq build` or bare `xtraq` (implicit `--refresh-snapshot`).                                                                                                  |
| Reads         | `.xtraqconfig`, `.xtraq/snapshots/**/*.json`, template files under `src/Templates/`, optional `.env` when refreshing snapshots.                                 |
| Writes        | Generated artefacts beneath `<OutputDir>` (defaults to `Xtraq/`) plus telemetry files when `--telemetry` is enabled.                                            |
| Exit codes    | `0` success; non-zero indicates validation/setup issues (missing config or snapshot) or generation failures bubbled from the runtime.                           |
| Preconditions | `.xtraqconfig` must resolve; snapshot metadata must exist unless `--refresh-snapshot` is supplied; when refresh is requested a database connection is required. |
| Side effects  | Schedules a background update check unless disabled; writes telemetry summaries when `--telemetry` is specified.                                                |

## Examples

```bash
# Generate artifacts for the current directory
xtraq build

# Target a sandbox project configured under debug/
xtraq build -p debug --verbose

# Refresh metadata and build in one step
xtraq build --refresh-snapshot --telemetry
```

Commit message:

Add Entity Framework integration toggle and helpers
Introduces the --entity-framework CLI option, configuration support, and environment variable (XTRAQ_ENTITY_FRAMEWORK) to enable EF Core integration helpers. Updates generator logic, templates, and tests to conditionally emit EF-specific code and documentation. Also refines documentation and sample project for multi-targeting and EF package references.

docs/content/2.cli/commands/4.build.md, after:

---
title: build
description: Executes code generation based on current configuration. Generates runtime artefacts (table types, procedure wrappers, DbContext helpers) using the metadata stored under `.xtraq/snapshots/`. JSON helpers ship enabled by default—no preview flags required.
---

## Usage

```bash
xtraq build [options]
```

## Requirements

- A tracked `.xtraqconfig` generated by `xtraq init`. The command fails fast with guidance to initialise if the file is missing or invalid.
- Snapshot metadata under `.xtraq/snapshots/`. Invoke `xtraq build --refresh-snapshot` (the default when running plain `xtraq`) to capture metadata automatically.
- `XTRAQ_GENERATOR_DB` available via environment variables or `.env` **only** when a snapshot refresh is requested.

## Command-Specific Options

| Option               | Description                                                                             |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--refresh-snapshot` | Refreshes the snapshot before generating code (equivalent to running `xtraq snapshot`). |

Combine the command with global flags from the [CLI overview](../index.md) when needed:

- `-p, --project-path` selects another project root.
- `--procedure <schema.proc>` scopes work to selected stored procedures.
- `--telemetry` persists timing data to `.xtraq/telemetry/build-*.json`.
- `--json-include-null-values` ensures JSON generators emit `[JsonIncludeNullValues]` attributes.
- `--entity-framework` enables EF Core integration helpers for the current run (sets `XTRAQ_ENTITY_FRAMEWORK=1`).
- `--ci` forces plain-text output, `-v/--verbose` prints detailed phase messages.

## Behavior Contract

| Aspect        | Details                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Invocation    | `xtraq build` or bare `xtraq` (implicit `--refresh-snapshot`).                                                                                                  |
| Reads         | `.xtraqconfig`, `.xtraq/snapshots/**/*.json`, template files under `src/Templates/`, optional `.env` when refreshing snapshots.                                 |
| Writes        | Generated artefacts beneath `<OutputDir>` (defaults to `Xtraq/`) plus telemetry files when `--telemetry` is enabled.                                            |
| Exit codes    | `0` success; non-zero indicates validation/setup issues (missing config or snapshot) or generation failures bubbled from the runtime.                           |
| Preconditions | `.xtraqconfig` must resolve; snapshot metadata must exist unless `--refresh-snapshot` is supplied; when refresh is requested a database connection is required. |
| Side effects  | Schedules a background update check unless disabled; writes telemetry summaries when `--telemetry` is specified.                                                |

## Examples

```bash
# Generate artifacts for the current directory
xtraq build

# Target a sandbox project configured under debug/
xtraq build -p debug --verbose

# Refresh metadata and build in one step
xtraq build --refresh-snapshot --telemetry
```
