docs/content/1.getting-started/3.quickstart.md, before:

---
title: Quickstart
description: From zero to first generated code in minutes. Follow these steps to install the xtraq CLI, initialize configuration, and generate your first client code.
---

## Prerequisites

- .NET 8 SDK or newer on the PATH (the CLI targets net8.0 and net10.0)
- Network access to the SQL Server instance that hosts your stored procedures

## 1. Prepare Your Environment

Make sure the xtraq CLI is available on your machine. Follow the [Installation guide](./installation.md) if you have not installed (or recently updated) the tool.

## 2. Initialize Configuration

```bash
xtraq init --connection "Server=.;Database=AppDb;Trusted_Connection=True;"
```

This command creates (or updates) the tracked `.xtraqconfig` that carries non-sensitive defaults (namespace, output directory, schema allow-list). Secrets such as `XTRAQ_GENERATOR_DB` stay in a project-scoped `.env` or your preferred secrets store. When you need workstation-specific overrides, mirror any entries in `.xtraqconfig.local`—it uses the same schema but is ignored by Git. Re-running `xtraq init` safely updates only the keys you specify.

## 3. Capture a Snapshot

```bash
xtraq snapshot
```

`xtraq snapshot` captures the latest stored procedure metadata and writes it to `.xtraq/snapshots` using the connection string resolved from environment variables or `.env`. Non-sensitive defaults travel with the repository through `.xtraqconfig`, so teammates only need to supply their local secrets.

## 4. Generate Code

```bash
xtraq build
```

Generated files land in the `Xtraq/` directory by default. Override the location by setting `XTRAQ_OUTPUT_DIR` in `.xtraqconfig` or by passing `--output` on the command line.

## Next Steps

- Review and commit the contents of the `Xtraq/` directory.
- Review tracked defaults and optional secrets in [Configuration Reference](../reference/configuration-schema.md).
- Explore additional commands in the [CLI Reference](../cli/index.md).

Commit message:

Update docs and tests for .NET 10 default, telemetry
Documentation now highlights .NET 10 as the default target framework, with .NET 8 compatibility notes. Minimal API samples and references are updated to exclusively target .NET 10. CLI telemetry alignment decision is documented, confirming local-only telemetry with new automated test coverage in CliTelemetryServiceTests. Test infrastructure adds workspace and executor collections to coordinate global state. Removed Directory.Build.props and preview SDK suppression, reflecting .NET 10 GA status.

docs/content/1.getting-started/3.quickstart.md, after:

---
title: Quickstart
description: From zero to first generated code in minutes. Follow these steps to install the xtraq CLI, initialize configuration, and generate your first client code.
---

## Prerequisites

- .NET 10 SDK on the PATH — the CLI defaults to net10.0; keep the .NET 8 SDK installed only if you must build for the LTS runtime.
- Network access to the SQL Server instance that hosts your stored procedures

## 1. Prepare Your Environment

Make sure the xtraq CLI is available on your machine. Follow the [Installation guide](./installation.md) if you have not installed (or recently updated) the tool.

## 2. Initialize Configuration

```bash
xtraq init --connection "Server=.;Database=AppDb;Trusted_Connection=True;"
```

This command creates (or updates) the tracked `.xtraqconfig` that carries non-sensitive defaults (namespace, output directory, schema allow-list). Secrets such as `XTRAQ_GENERATOR_DB` stay in a project-scoped `.env` or your preferred secrets store. When you need workstation-specific overrides, mirror any entries in `.xtraqconfig.local`—it uses the same schema but is ignored by Git. Re-running `xtraq init` safely updates only the keys you specify.

## 3. Capture a Snapshot

```bash
xtraq snapshot
```

`xtraq snapshot` captures the latest stored procedure metadata and writes it to `.xtraq/snapshots` using the connection string resolved from environment variables or `.env`. Non-sensitive defaults travel with the repository through `.xtraqconfig`, so teammates only need to supply their local secrets.

## 4. Generate Code

```bash
xtraq build
```

Generated files land in the `Xtraq/` directory by default. Override the location by setting `XTRAQ_OUTPUT_DIR` in `.xtraqconfig` or by passing `--output` on the command line.

## Next Steps

- Review and commit the contents of the `Xtraq/` directory.
- Review tracked defaults and optional secrets in [Configuration Reference](../reference/configuration-schema.md).
- Explore additional commands in the [CLI Reference](../cli/index.md).
